CHAPTER IV.
THE FIRST PRINCIPLE IN THE SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH
Thought is the only power which can produce tangible riches from the formless substance.
The stuff, from which all things are made, is a substance which thinks, and the thought
of form in this substance produces the form.
Original substance moves according to its thoughts.
Every form and process you see in nature is the visible expression of a thought in original
substance.
As the formless stuff thinks of a form, it takes that form.
As it thinks of a motion, it makes that motion.
That is the way all things were created.
We live in a thought-world which is part of a thought-universe.
The thought of a moving universe extended throughout formless substance, and the thinking
stuff moving according to that thought took the form of systems of planets and maintains
that form.
Thinking substance takes the form of its thought and moves according to the thought.
Holding the idea of a circling system of sounds and worlds, it takes the form of these bodies
and moves them as it thinks.
Thinking the form of a slow-growing oak tree, it moves accordingly and produces the tree,
though centuries may be required to do the work.
In creating, the formless seems to move according to the lines of motion it has established.
The thought of an oak tree does not cause the instant formation of a full-grown tree,
but it does start in motion the forces which will produce the tree along established lines
of growth.
Every thought of form, held in thinking substance, causes the creation of the form, but always,
or at least generally, along lines of growth and action already established.
The thought of a house of a certain construction, if it were impressed upon formless substance,
might not cause the instant formation of the house, but it would cause the turning of creative
energies already working in trade and commerce into such channels as to result in the speedy
building of the house.
And if there were no existing channels through which the creative energy could work, then
the house would be formed directly from primal substance, without waiting for the slow processes
of the organic and inorganic world.
No thought of form can be impressed upon original substance without causing the creation of
the form.
Man is a thinking center and can originate thought.
All the forms that man fashions with his hands must first exist in his thought.
He cannot shape a thing until he has thought that thing.
And so far man has confined his efforts wholly to the work of his hands.
He has applied manual labor to the world of forms, seeking the change or modify those
already existing.
He has never thought of trying to cause the creation of new forms by impressing his thoughts
upon formless substance.
When man has a thought-form, he takes material from the forms of nature, and makes an image
of the form which is in his mind.
He has so far made little or no effort to cooperate with formless intelligence, to work
with the Father.
He has not dreamed that he can do what he sees the Father doing.
Man reshapes and modifies existing forms by manual labor.
He has given no attention to the question whether he may not produce things from formless
substance by communicating his thoughts to it.
We propose to prove that he may do so, to prove that any man or woman may do so, and
to show how.
As our first step, we must lay down three fundamental propositions.
First, we assert that there is one original formless stuff or substance from which all
things are made.
All the seemingly many elements are but different presentations of one element.
All the many forms found in organic and inorganic nature are but different shapes, made from
the same stuff.
And this stuff is thinking stuff.
A thought held in it produces the form of the thought.
Thought in thinking substance produces shapes.
Man is a thinking center, capable of original thought.
If man can communicate his thoughts to original thinking substance, he can cause the creation
or formation of the thing he thinks about.
To summarize this, there is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which,
in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of the universe.
A thought in this substance produces the thing that is imaged by the thought.
Man can form things in his thought, and by impressing his thought upon formless substance,
can cause the thing he thinks about to be created.
It may be asked if I can prove these statements, and without going into details, I answer that
I can do so, both by logic and experience.
Reasoning back from the phenomena of form and thought, I come to one original thinking
substance, and reasoning forward from this thinking substance, I come to man's power
to cause the formation of the thing he thinks about.
And by experiment, I find the reasoning true, and this is my strongest proof.
If one man who reads this book gets rich by doing what he tells him to do, that is evidence
in support of my claim.
But if every man who does what he tells him to do gets rich, that is positive proof until
someone goes through the process and fails.
The theory is true until the process fails, and this process will not fail, for every
man who does exactly what this book tells him to do will get rich.
I have said that man gets rich by doing things in a certain way, and in order to do so, man
must become able to think in a certain way.
A man's way of doing things is the direct result of the way he thinks about things.
To do things in a way you want to do them, you will have to acquire the ability to think
the way you want to think.
This is the first step toward getting rich.
To think what you want to think is to think truth, regardless of appearances.
Every man has the natural and inherent power to think what he wants to think, but it requires
far more effort to do so than it does to think the thoughts which are suggested by
appearances.
To think according to appearance is easy.
To think truth, regardless of appearances, is laborious, and requires the expenditure
of more power than any other work man is called upon to perform.
There is no labor from which most people shrink as they do from that of sustained and consecutive
thought.
It is the hardest work in the world.
This is especially true when truth is contrary to appearances.
Every appearance in the visible world tends to produce a corresponding form in the mind
which observes it, and this can only be prevented by holding the thought of the truth.
To look upon the appearance of disease will produce the form of disease in your own mind,
and ultimately in your body.
Unless you hold the thought of the truth, which is that there is no disease, it is only
and the reality is health.
To look upon the appearances of poverty will produce corresponding forms in your own mind,
unless you hold to the truth that there is no poverty, there is only abundance.
To think health when surrounded by the appearances of disease, or to think riches when in the
midst of appearances of poverty, requires power.
But he who acquires this power becomes a mastermind.
He can conquer fate.
He can have what he wants.
This power can only be acquired by getting hold of the basic fact which is behind all
appearances, and that fact is that there is one thinking substance from which and by which
all things are made.
Then we must grasp the truth that every thought held in the substance becomes a form, and
that man can so impress his thoughts upon it as to cause them to take form and become
visible things.
When we realize this, we lose all doubt and fear, for we know that we can create we want
to create, we can get what we want to have, and can become what we want to be.
As a first step toward getting rich, you must believe the three fundamental statements given
previously in this chapter, and in order to emphasize them, I repeat them here.
There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which, in its original state,
permits, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of the universe.
The thought in this substance produces the thing that is imaged by the thought.
Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought upon formless substance,
can cause the thing he thinks about to be created.
You must lay aside all other concepts of the universe than this monistic one, and you must
dwell upon this until it is fixed in your mind, and has become your habitual thought.
Read discrete statements over and over again, fix every word upon your memory, and meditate
upon them until you firmly believe what they say.
If a doubt comes to you, cast it aside as a sin.
Do not listen to arguments against this idea.
Do not go to churches or lectures where a contrary concept of things is thought or preached.
Do not read magazines or books which teach a different idea.
If you get mixed up in your faith, all your efforts will be in vain.
Do not ask why these things are true, nor speculate as to how they can be true.
Simply take them on trust.
The science of getting rich begins with the absolute acceptance of this faith.
End of chapter 4